MATH 233 Sec 001 Spring 2015 Instructor: Professor S. Goodman Office: Phillips 386 Email: seg@email.unc.eduOffice hours: Mondays & Wednesdays 1:30-2:30 pm; Tuesdays & Thursdays 11:00-11:30 amCourse site at www.unc.edu/sakai Check this site regularly! I’ll post announcements, grades, etc.Text: (Multivariable) Calculus: early transcendentals, by James Stewart, 7th edition. You are also required to have WebAssign access.Prerequisites: Math 232 or 283Course description: This is the third course in the standard calculus sequence, studying calculus of functions of several variables (most of chapters 12-16 of the text). In the first two semesters of calculus, we worked with real-valued functions of a single variable; that is f: R  R taking real numbers to real numbers. We assume the material in Chapters 1-11 of the Stewart text. In this class we will extend our knowledge to functions of more than one variable (e.g. f(x,y) from R 2 to R) and to vector-valued functions whose values are points in space (e.g. f(t) = (x(t), y(t), z(t)) from R to R 3). The graphs of such functions are surfaces or curves in space. So we begin by developing the necessary geometric tools for visualizing and working in three dimensions.WebAssign www.webassign.com Class Key for our section: unc 3829 4747 You will need this code to access our class on WebAssign. Assignments will become “visible” on January 8, the first day of classes. There is a two-week grace period (beginning that day) during which you may use WebAssign for this class without having paid for access. If you have bought a shrink-wrapped book, don’t open it until you are sure you will stay with the course. Please see the Sakai site for further information on accessing WebAssign.Homework assignments will be due regularly on WebAssign. Homework will count as  (12.5%) of your final grade. In general, homework will be due weekly by class time (2:00 pm) on Thursdays. No late homework will be accepted.Exams: Two exams will be given with (dates as follows:Exam 1 on chapters 12-13: Tuesday Feb. 10Exam 2 on chapter 14 and first part of 15: Tuesday Mar. 24Each exam is worth 100 points. Make-up exams are not allowed. In case of a medical excuse or family emergency, with written documentation, a missed exam can be replaced by the final exam grade.Note: While I reserve the right to make changes to this syllabus if necessary, including test dates, I will announce any change as early as possible.Absence from the final examination at the scheduled time can be excused only by the director of Campus Health Services (who can authorize the registrar to issue an “official permit to take final examination”) or the academic dean (who can issue an “examination excuse”). This exam is given in compliance with UNC regulations and calendar.Final Exam: noon-3:00pm on Monday May 4. The final exam will be cumulative and worth 150 points. Absence from the final examination at the scheduled time can be excused only by the director of Campus Health Services (who can authorize the registrar to issue an “official permit to take final examination”) or the academic dean (who can issue an “examination excuse”). This exam is given in compliance with UNC regulations and calendar.Grading summary: Homework total: 50 pointsExams total: 200 points (100 each exam)Final exam: 150 pointsHonor Code: It is expected that each student in this class will conduct him or herself within the guidelines of the Honor System. All academic work should be done with the high level of honesty and integrity that this University demands. For more information, please visit studentconduct.unc.eduThis is bullshit  code 12/12/2015 there are office hours no periodmore shit 5/5/15 this... this shit noe show ip exam.and more shit 7/7 final exam....