PSYC 101: Introduction to Psychology

Instructor: David L. Penn, Ph.D. 

Teaching Assistants: Neil Hester 

Class Time: T TH, 9:30-10:45

Place: Hanes Art Center, Room 0121

REQUIRED TEXT: 

Weiten, W. (2013). Psychology: Themes and variations (briefer version), (9th 

edition). Belmont, CA: Thomson & Wadsworth.

COURSE OBJECTIVES: 

The primary objective of this course is to provide an overview of the field of 

psychology.  Students will be introduced to the various areas that comprise psychology, 

as well as important issues in the field (e.g., nature vs. nurture). The course will be 

comprised of lectures, demonstrations, and films.  You can also expect receiving 

interesting articles, and links to articles and videos, related to psychology. Unless noted 

otherwise, these will be more of the FYI variety, than a requirement.

COURSE EVALUATION OVERVIEW 

Course evaluation is based on performance on exams and brief essays 

(described below).  A review sheet will be handed out prior to each exam to help focus 

Four tests (three exams and one final) will be given over the course of the 

semester.  Each test will consist of multiple-choice covering information presented in 

class (i.e., lectures and films), and in the readings.  The lowest grade received on the 

first three tests will be dropped. If you miss a test, you will receive a "zero" for that exam 

and that will be the grade that is dropped. If you miss more than one test, you will 

receive a grade of 'F' on the second test that is missed - NO EXCEPTIONS.  The final 

examination cannot be dropped. 

The exams that you keep will each be worth 100 points. And, the final is also 

worth 100 points (although there might be more items on this exam than on the previous 

ones). Therefore, you can earn up to 300 points on the exams.  They will be worth 80% 

WRITING ASSIGNMENTS 

You will receive 5 writing assignments throughout the semester.  The purpose of 

the writing assignment is to help you integrate and apply what we’re discussing in class, 

and what you’ve read in the text (which will, in turn, help you study for your exams).  In 

a typical assignment, you might be asked to define and describe certain terms (e.g., 

behaviorism) in your own words, and then to discuss examples of behaviorism in daily 

Writing assignments will be posted on Sakai and you will submit your essays via 

Sakai.  For general instructions regarding Sakai, please go to: 

https://www.unc.edu/sakai/?5. 

Each writing assignment will be graded on a 0-5 point scale.  Five points will be 

awarded for an outstanding answer that comprehensively addresses the question(s) 

and is written in a clear, understandable, grammatically correct manner (yes, writing 

counts!).  Four points will be rewarded for a very good answer, but falls short (e.g. in 

terms of content, grammar, etc) of an outstanding answer.  Three points will be awarded 

for an adequate answer. Two points will be awarded for an answer that attempts to 

answer the question, but is below average in terms of content or grammar.  One point 

will be awarded for an answer that does not completely address question, has a poor 

writing style, and some grammatical and/or typographical errors. No points will be 

awarded for an answer that does not address the question at all or for an answer riddled 

with poor writing and many typographical errors 

Please observe the following when writing your assignment: 1) One inch margins 

all around; 2) double spaced; 3) 12 point Times Roman font; 4) No less that 1.75 pages 

in length and no more than 2 pages in length; 5) List your name and PID number in the 

header on the right of the page; and 6) That your assignment is turned in on time.  

Writing assignments are due one week from when they are assigned (which will be 

announced both in class and on the Announcements section of Sakai).  Assignments 

will be deducted one point for each day it is turned in late. 

Each writing assignment will be worth 5% of your grade.  As you can drop the 

lowest grade of your five writing assignments, the remaining four writing assignments 

will be worth 20% of your grade.

A NOTE ABOUT GRADES: 

The two exams and final correspond to 80% of your grade.  The writing 

assignments correspond to 20% of your grade.  To calculate your final average, we’ll 

take the exam average multiply that by 80 and then multiply your essay average by 20.  

Any final averages over .5 of a point will be rounded to the next higher point.  For 

example, a final average of 93.5 would be rounded to a 94 (note: an average of 93.4 

would remain a 93).  The expectation is that exams will not be curved.  However, if the 

exam appears to have been extremely difficult (e.g., the class average was 70 or lower 

and/or more students received Ds and Fs than As and Bs), a curve may be applied to 

exam scores.  Final grades on exams or written assignments are not subject to 

negotiation or change unless a clerical error in calculating the grade is present. In other 

words, we don’t offer extra credit after the final. 

To calculate your final grade, I use the following scale:

A = 94-100; A- = 90-93; B+ = 87-89; B = 84-86; B- = 80-83; C+ = 77-79; C = 74-76;

C- = 70-73; D+ = 67-69; D = 60-66; F = 59 or lower

POLL EVERYWHERE REGISTRATION

Throughout the semester, there might be in-class surveys. These will be conducted 

through the Poll Everywhere course interaction software. All students are required to 

register on the site. To do this, go to http://tinyurl.com/qzrtmyp . After you enter your 

information, register, and verify your account, you will be taken to a page that asks how 

you want to be identified:

Mandatory name format: Under “How should UNC-CH Admin identify you?” enter 

your University personal identification number (PID) and your Onyen using the 

following format: YourPID_YourOnyen (e.g., ########_jdoe). This format must be 

used for your answers to receive credit (if we use this for extra credit). Poll 

Everywhere allows students to submit answers either online or by text message. If you 

want to text your answers, make sure you also register your phone number.

For the Student FAQs on Poll Everywhere, please go to: http://help.unc.edu/help/poll-

TIPS FOR SUCCEEDING IN CLASS 

In order to succeed in this class (i.e. to get a grade of A or B) you should 

consider the following: 1) Reading the chapter before the class lecture on that topic; 2) 

Outlining the chapter using a highlighter; 3) Making an outline of the chapter; 4) 

Reading the Review section at the end of the chapter, which includes key terms, 

concepts, and people, as well as taking the practice test; 5) Attend all classes and 

take good notes.  Following class, go over your notes to see if you have any questions.  

A fair percentage of the exam questions come from class lectures and in-class 

demonstrations and videos.

 6) If you have questions, then come to my or the Teaching Assistants’ office 

hours.  Our office hours are listed on the syllabus and we are available to help you with 

any of the course material. Also, the TAs will be offering review sessions that you 

should strongly consider attending; 7) Go to the Learning Center’s website 

(http://learningcenter.unc.edu/) and schedule an appointment with an academic 

counselor (they can help you with study strategies); 8) You will receive a review sheet a 

few days prior to the exam.  Make sure that you know every term and/or can answer 

every question on the review sheet; 9) Try explaining the answers on the review sheet 

to someone else (or, if you don’t want to bore them, explain them in your head). 

When you take the exam, I recommend the following: 1) Take your time and read 

each question (and answers) carefully; 2) If you are not sure about a question, put an 

asterisk next to it and go on to another question.  Sometimes, you’ll figure out an 

answer after going through the exam; 3) For questions that you’re not sure about, try 

and eliminate at least one answer (in a multiple choice test) right away (this will increase 

the odds of getting an answer right by chance from 25% to 33%).  Then, if possible, 

eliminate another answer.  This way, if you’re still not sure, you chances of getting one 

right by chance increases to 50%; 4) Make sure that all answers on the scantron have 

been filled in and match the items on the exam; 5) Double-check all of your answers! 6) 

If you’re not sure about a question, by all means, ask one of the Teaching Assistants or 

me (as we will be at the exam).

RESEARCH PARTICIPATION

The psychology department has adopted a policy to encourage undergraduates 

enrolled in Psychology 101 to participate in ongoing research studies.  Specifically, you 

will be required either to serve as a participant in research studies or alternatively, to 

read research articles and write critiques on them.  The participant pool coordinator will 

explain specific details regarding this requirement during the first two weeks in class.  

Please contact the participant pool coordinator at psypool@email.unc.edu if you have 

any questions about, or problems with, the research requirement.  We will also post 

information on the research requirements on the course website.

ABOUT YOUR INSTRUCTORS 

David Penn, Ph.D. is the Linda Wagner Martin Distinguished Professor of 

Psychology.  I was born in Brooklyn, NY in 1960 and raised in Great Neck, LI.  I 

received my Ph.D. from the University of Nebraska in Clinical Psychology in 1994 and 

I’ve been on the faculty at UNC since 1999.  I previously taught at the Illinois Institute of 

Technology (in Chicago) and LSU.  My area of research is in schizophrenia, specifically 

in the areas of social cognition and psychosocial treatment.  In 2007, the Journal of 

Clinical Psychology named me one of the “top producers of scholarly publications in 

clinical psychology Ph.D. programs”.

I have taught psychology 101 numerous times and really enjoy doing so. I won 

the UNC John L. Sanders award for Distinguished Undergraduate Teaching and 

Service in 2005 and the UNC Distinguished Teaching Award for Post-Baccalaureate 

Instruction in 2009.  Please visit my website when you have a chance to read more 

about my research or to view recent teaching evaluations: http://www.unc.edu/~dpenn/

Yenping Chang is a second year doctoral student in the Social Psychology 

program under Dr. Sara Algoe. Yenping is interested in the functions of positive 

emotions (especially the self-transcendent positive family) and their interaction with 

culture. His current research focuses on the emotion of gratitude and its ability to 

promote relationship quality in different cultures. Yenping received BAs in psychology 

and sociology and a MS in social psychology from National Taiwan University, Taiwan.

Neil Hester is a 2nd year graduate student working with Dr. Kurt Gray. He 

investigates judgments of biomedical enhancements (e.g., steroids used to build 

muscle, Ritalin used to improve studying performance), how time pressure and 

ambiguity influence judgments of different moral situations, how paranoia influences 

people’s perceptions of the agency of others, and other topics related to mind 

perception and morality. Neil received his BA from Texas Tech University in 2012. 

GENERAL ATTENDANCE 

Students will be expected to attend all classes and is highly recommended, as 

exams will be based mainly on material covered in class, including video clips and 

exercises.  If you do not attend class, it is your responsibility to find out what you 

missed, including any announced changes in the syllabus schedule.  Neither your TA 

nor I will provide class notes if you are unable to attend.  In other words, you will need to 

rely on other students to get copies of the classroom notes.

EXAM ATTENDANCE 

In order to take any exam, you must bring the following with you:

1) A Student Identification card - This must be shown to the 

test proctor when you turn in your exam.  If you do not show 

the test proctor the student ID, you will not receive credit 

for the examination.

2) Two #2 pencils

3) A scantron sheet (provided at the bookstore) 

Students who arrive to the exam late will be admitted, until one student has left 

the exam.  Once one student has left the exam, no one else will be seated for the exam.  

Late arriving students who are admitted to the exam will not be given additional time.  

Late arriving students who are not admitted to the exam will receive a 0 for the exam. 

The exam grades will be posted on Sakai within one week of the exam. 

MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS: 

Students are expected to take all exams at the scheduled times (see schedule 

below).  Make-up exams will only be given for University-excused absences (e.g., 

university-sponsored trips, outings, etc).  If you are going to miss an exam, you must let 

me know that you will miss the exam two weeks before the exam is given.  You will 

need a valid document from the university to miss a class or exam. 

If you do not contact me prior to the exam, and you miss an exam, you will not be 

allowed to take a make-up exam, even if you have a valid University excused absence. 

Please note, however, that the final decision for granting a make-up exam lies with the 

Instructor, who may not approve the request depending on the circumstances. 

Make up exams will be scheduled at the convenience of the Instructor and 

Teaching Assistant.  All make-up exams will be in a difficult, short-answer format.

ACADEMIC INTEGRITY, PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT AND UNIVERSITY 

The university honor code will be enforced in this class.  Any violation (e.g., 

cheating, plagiarism, etc) will be reported to the Student Attorney General.  Thus, all 

University rules and policies concerning academic integrity, parental involvement, and 

University deadlines will be in effect for this course.  

Students are encouraged to participate in class discussions and to share 

thoughts, feelings, and opinions about the course topics.  However, students should not 

feel pressured to discuss any topic that makes you feel uncomfortable.  If any of the 

material hits "close to home," and you want to discuss it with a mental health 

professional, please contact Student Psychological Services (966-3658).  This service is 

available at no charge to help you with your concerns and is strictly confidential. 

Date Topic Chapter

1/8 Review syllabus; Introduction Ch. 1

1/13 The Evolution of Psychology Ch. 1

1/15 Research

1/20 Research Ch. 2

1/22 Research Ch. 2#

1/27 Biological bases of behavior Ch. 3

1/29 Biological bases of behavior Ch. 3* 

2/3 Biological bases of behavior Ch. 3

2/5 Exam #1 (chapters 1-3)

2/10 Sensation and Perception Ch. 4

2/12 Sensation and Perception Ch. 4#

2/17 Consciousness Ch. 5

2/19 Consciousness Ch. 5*

2/24 Learning Ch. 6

2/26 Learning Ch. 6

3/3 Exam #2 (chapters 4-6)

3/5 Human memory Ch. 7

3/10 NO CLASS; SPRING BREAK

3/12 NO CLASS; SPREAK BREAK

3/17 Human memory Ch. 7#

3/19 Cognition and Intelligence Ch. 8

3/24 Cognition and Intelligence Ch. 8*

3/26 Personality Ch. 11

3/31 Exam #3 (chapters 7, 8, 11)

4/2 Social behavior Ch. 12#

4/7 Social behavior Ch. 12

4/9 Psychological disorders Ch. 14*

4/14 Psychological disorders Ch. 14#

4/16 Psychological disorders Ch. 14

4/21 Treatment of psychological disorders Ch. 15*

4/23 Treatment of psychological disorders Ch. 15

5/1 FINAL EXAM (8:00 AM)

# Essay questions sent to class

* Essays due